# Recipe 006 — Constraining a Base Type

In this series we are cataloging common patterns with JSON Schema and the .NET code generated by Corvus.Text.Json.

It is especially useful for developers who want to move to a schema-first approach, but are unsure how that will map to their .NET code.

If you have no experience of JSON Schema at all, I would recommend you read [the getting started step-by-step](https://json-schema.org/learn/getting-started-step-by-step) documentation provided by the JSON Schema team.

## Adding constraints

Whether a type is [open or closed](../004-OpenVersusClosedTypes/), you can further constrain it in a schema.

Remember that a closed type in JSON Schema is not like a "sealed" type in an OO language like C#. You can still base another schema on that type - it's just that it will not allow extra properties that are not present on the base type.

In this case, we will use `$ref` to declare that we are basing our new schema on the `person-closed.json` schema.

Notice how we can reference schema in external documents, not just the local schema document.

:::aside
This would work equally well with the `person-open.json` we used when [extending a base type.](../005-ExtendingABaseType/)
:::

We then constrain it by defining a new version of the `height` property.

Again, we use `$ref` to base the new schema for the `height` property on the schema of the `height` property on the base schema. Then we add a new `minimum` value to constrain it to be greater than `2.0`.

Notice how we don't just have to reference schemas defined in a `$defs` section. We can reference any schema defined in the document.

I don't generally encourage this pattern; ideally if a type is *intended* to be shared and composed in this way, I like to indicate that by embedding it in the `$defs` section and documenting it properly.

File: `person-tall.json`

```json
{
  "title": "A tall person",
  "$ref": "./person-closed.json",
  "properties": {
    "height": {
      "$ref": "./person-closed.json#/properties/height",
      "minimum": 2.0
    }
  }
}
```

:::aside
In draft 6 and draft 7, `$ref` cannot be used in this way. It acts as a reference to the target type and *ignores* the adjacent values. This is often a bit surprising! Instead, you can use `allOf` with a single value to get the same effect. It is a little clunkier to read, but works in the same way.
`{ "allOf": [{"$ref": "./person-closed.json"}]}`
:::

File: `person-closed.json`

```json
{
  "title": "The person schema https://schema.org/Person",
  "type": "object",
  "required": [ "familyName", "givenName", "birthDate" ],
  "properties": {
    "familyName": { "$ref": "#/$defs/constrainedString" },
    "givenName": { "$ref": "#/$defs/constrainedString" },
    "otherNames": { "$ref": "#/$defs/constrainedString" },
    "birthDate": {
      "type": "string",
      "format": "date"
    },
    "height": {
      "type": "number",
      "format": "double",
      "exclusiveMinimum": 0.0,
      "maximum": 3.0
    }
  },

  "unevaluatedProperties": false,

  "$defs": {
    "constrainedString": {
      "type": "string",
      "minLength": 1,
      "maxLength": 256
    }
  }
}
```

When we validate, the `Height` property on `PersonTall` will be constrained *both* by characteristics of the base type (such that `0 < height <= 3.0`) *and* the new `height >= 2.0`. The new constraints are composed from *both* the base *and* the derived schema.

This "composition" behaviour is often surprising to people familiar with OO languages. You can't "turn off" the base constraints in the way you can with, say, C# virtual methods that do not call the base from the derived type, because they are composed together.

You may also be surprised to learn that it is not even necessary to include this `$ref` to the base "height" schema to get the desired validation behaviour! If you just added the `minimum` constraint to the new `height` property, it would validate as desired.

However, `$ref` is the way we describe to the code generator that we are basing this new `HeightEntity` type on the one from the base schema, rather than merely defining an isolated constraint. In that way, the generated type inherits all the other characteristics from the one on which it is based.

### Are your constraints compatible?

Another consequence of this composition behaviour is that any additional constraints you apply should be compatible with the base type's existing constraints (if any).

Neither JSON Schema itself, nor Corvus.Text.Json enforce this rule - but any schema that doesn't follow it will not be especially useful!

Imagine, for example, defining a schema that *required* an entity to be both an `object` *and* a `string`. That's perfectly possible in JSON Schema; and the code generator will emit "correct" code that happily compiles. But no entity will ever be valid.

(Contrast this with a constraint that an entity can be *either* an `object` *or* a `string` - that would be absolutely fine; this kind of "sum type" is common in e.g. typescript, but is unusual in .NET languages. We will see later how Corvus.Text.Json enables these kinds of structures in dotnet.)

The code generator produces both `PersonTall` and `PersonClosed`; each has its own `HeightEntity`.

[Example code](./Program.cs)

```csharp
using Corvus.Text.Json;
using ConstrainingABaseType.Models;
using NodaTime;

// Create a tall person, although Anne is not tall enough to be a valid tall person!
using JsonWorkspace workspace = JsonWorkspace.Create();
using var tallDoc = PersonTall.CreateBuilder(
    workspace,
    PersonTall.Build(
        static (ref PersonTall.Builder b) => b.Create(
            birthDate: new LocalDate(1820, 1, 17),
            familyName: "Brontë",
            givenName: "Anne",
            height: 1.57)));

string json = tallDoc.RootElement.ToString();
using var parsedTall = ParsedJsonDocument<PersonTall>.Parse(json);
PersonTall personTall = parsedTall.RootElement;

// Convert to the base type
PersonClosed personClosedFromTall = PersonClosed.From(personTall);

// personTall is not valid because of the additional constraint.
if (personTall.EvaluateSchema())
{
    Console.WriteLine("personTall is valid");
}
else
{
    Console.WriteLine("personTall is not valid");
}

// But personClosedFromTall is valid because it does not have the
// additional constraint.
if (personClosedFromTall.EvaluateSchema())
{
    Console.WriteLine("personClosedFromTall is valid");
}
else
{
    Console.WriteLine("personClosedFromTall is not valid");
}
```
